# Introduction
The goal of this class is to learn how to use Haskell to program systems with reduced upfront cost. Haskell is
typically taught in the context of programming language research, but this course will adopt a systems perspective. It’s a surprisingly flexible and effective language, and since it was created by and for programming language resources, there are lots of interesting things to do, and it’s extremely flexible (if you want to try something new, even if it’s syntactical, this is as easy as using a library, unlike most programming languages).

The first week of this class will cover the basics of Haskell, though having some prior experience or a supplement (e.g. [Real World Haskell](http://book.realworldhaskell.org/) or [Learn You a Haskell](http://learnyouahaskell.com/)) is helpful. After the basics, we will cover more advanced techniques. The class grade will be based on attendance and participation, including scribing one of the lectures, and also three warm-up programming assignments and a large final project and presentation, in groups of one to three people.

Now, let’s talk about Haskell.

# Getting started with Haskell

Install the Haskell Platform or cabal along with ghc.

* Cabal
* ghc is the official Haskell compiler.

## Hello World

Simple.

```
main = putStrLn "Hello, world"
```

Put this in a file (`hello_world.hs`). Compile it with `ghc hello_world.hs`,
and run the executable. But you can also load it in the interpreter:

## ghci

Interpreter for Haskell. Not quite a read-execute loop like other languages,
but it's useful.

# Bindings

* The `=` sign declares bindings.
* Local bindings with let
```
x = 2       -- Two hyphens introduce a comment.
y = 3       -- Comments go until the end of a line.
main = let z = x + y -- let introduces local bindings.
       in print z
```
* Haskell will auto-insert semicolons by a layout rule.
* You can bind functions.

```
add arg1 arg2 = arg1 + arg2
five = add 2 3
```

* Tokens on the line are function arguments
* Associativity - use parentheses for compound expressions
* Bound names cannot start with uppercase letters.

# Haskell is a **pure** functional language.

* By functions, we mean mathematical functions.
    * No side effects
    * Deterministic - same result every time it is run with an input
* Variables are immutable.
    * `x = 5; x = 6` is an error, since `x` cannot be changed.
* Thus, bindings are order-independent.
* lazy - definitions of symbols are evaluated only when needed. If you divide
  two variables, for instance, it will not be evaluated until you read the
  result
    * This means you can divide by 0, create infinite lists... etc. so long as
      you're careful that those don't get evaluated. For example:
```
safeDiv x y =
    let q = div x y     -- safe as q isn't evaluated if y == 0
    in if y == 0 then 0 else q
main = print (safeDiv 1 0) -- prints 0
```
* Bindings are recursive - a bound symbol is in scope within its own definition.

This program will cause an infinite loop (the program "diverges"), because the
variable `x` in `main` is defined in terms of itself, not in terms of the
declaration `x = 5`:

```
x = 5 -- not the x used in main

main = let x = x + 1 -- introduces a new x, defined in terms of itself
        in print x
```

# How can you program without mutable variables?

## Loops

* In C, you use mutable variables to create loops (like a for loop).
* In Haskell, you can use recursion to "re-bind" argument symbols in a new scope
    (call the function with different arguments to get different behavior).
```
factorial n = if n > 1 then n * factorial (n-1)
                       else 1
```
    * *Problem*: The example recursive factorial implementation in Haskell uses
     function calls to loop, but those function calls will create stack frames,
     which will cause Haskell to consume memory.
    * *Solution*: Haskell supports optimized **tail recursion**; if the recursive
	 call is the last thing a function does, it can be optimized into a loop.
     Use an accumulator argument to make the factorial call tail recursive.
```
factorial n = let loop acc n' = if n' > 1
                                then loop (acc * n') (n' - 1)
                                else acc
```

## Guards and where clauses

* *Guards* let you shorten function declarations by declaring conditions in
  which a function occurs:
    * Pipe ("`|`") symbol introduces a guard. Guards are evaluated top to
      bottom
    * the first `True` guard wins.
    * `otherwise` in the Haskell system `Prelude` evaluates to `true`
For example, we can rewrite the tail-recursive factorial function from above like this:
```
factorial n = let loop acc n' | n' > 1 = loop (acc * n') (n' - 1)
                              | otherwise = acc
              in loop 1 n
```
* Bindings can end with `where` clauses
    * Where clauses can scope over multiple guards
    * Convenient for binding variables to use in guards
```
factorial n = loop 1 n
    where loop acc n' | n' > 1    = loop (acc * n) (n' - 1) -- bug, should be n'
                      | otherwise = acc
```

## Variable names
* It's conventional in Haskell to have versions of variables and functions
  denoted by apostrophes ('). But David Mazieres finds that this can cause
  difficult to find bugs, so he suggests that you **use the longer symbol name
  for the larger scope**. For example, one might use `n0` in the outer scope and
  then `n` for the inner scope, instead of `n` and `n'`. This makes it easier to
  catch bugs caused by dropping the `'`.

# Types

## Every expression and binding has a type (it is *strongly typed*)

Here are some common types:
* `Bool` is the Boolean type, and is either `True` or `False`.
* `Char`, the character type, is a Unicode code point.
* `Int` is a fixed-size integer.
* `Integer` is an arbitrarily-sized integer.
* `Double` is an IEEE-floating point number, much like doubles in C.
* Functions also have types. A function from type `a` to type `b` (i.e. accepting one argument of
  type `a`, and returning something of type `b`) has type denoted `a -> b`.
* Tuples have types given by parentheses, e.g. a tuple of an `Integer` and a `Bool` would be denoted `(Integer, Bool)`. There is also a *unit*, which is the zero tuple `()`. This can be thought of as akin to the `void` type from C.

* You can declare the type of a symbol or expression with double colons
  ("`::`").
    * The `::` operator has the lowest precedence, so you need to parenthesize.

## Haskell uses function *currying*.
* Functions are called one argument at a time.
* Consider `add 2 3`.
    * This is equivalent to `(add 2) 3`
    * `(add 2)` returns a function which takes one parameter - the second
      parameter in adding something.
* Usually, the compiler can infer types, using `:t`
    * It's a good idea to declare types of top-level bindings.
```
*Main> :t add
add :: Integer -> Integer -> Integer
```

## Defining data types

Types start with capital letters.

* The `data` keyword
    * Give it a name
    * Give it a set of constructors
    * Tell what other types it derives from (`deriving Show` allows it to print
      your type, for example)
Example:

```
data PointT = PointC Double Double deriving show
```

* Types and constructors can use the same name, since they are in different
  namespaces.
    * But, you can have multiple constructors by declaring them with different
      names.
```
data Point = Cartesian Double Double
           | Polar Double Double
             deriving Show
```
    * Constructors additionally don't need to take arguments.
```
data Color = Red | Green | Blue | Violet deriving (Show, Eq, Enum)
```

* Constructors act like functions producing values of their types.
* How to access these values?
    * *`case` statements*.
```
getX, getMaxCoord :: Point -> Double
getX point = case point of
               Point x y -> x       -- if only the Point x y constructor is around
getMaxCoord (Point x y) | x > y     = x
                        | otherwise = y
```
    * Spelling out the type in a function declaration through *pattern matching*
```
isRed :: Color -> Bool
isRed Red = True        -- Only matches constructor Red
isRed c   = False       -- Lower-case c just a variable
```

* Types can have parameters.
    * Some useful, parameterized types: `Maybe a` and `Either a b`:
```
data Maybe a = Just a
             | Nothing

data Either a b = Left a
                | Right b
```
These can be used, for example, for error reporting. When using `Either`, it's customary to use `Right` to hold the result of a correct computation, and `Left` for any kind of exceptional return value.
* You can deconstruct types and bind variables within guards. Example in
  slides.

# Lists

So common that Haskell has Lists as a predefined type with syntactic sugar.
Strings are just lists of `Char`s.

* Bullets from slides

## Constructors

Two constructors: `x:rest` and `[]`.

* `[]` is the empty list
* `x:rest` is an infix constructor of a variable to be prepended to the head of
  the `rest` of the list.

### Note on error code:

* `error` is a function of any type that throws an exception. It is intended for
  progamming errors that should never occur.

## Other methods

* The `++` infix operator is used for concatenation of lists: `list1 ++ list2`
* `length` returns the length of a list.
* `head` returns the first element of a list.
* `tail` returns all but the first element of a list. Calling `head` or `tail` on an empty list is an error.
* `filter` accepts a *predicate* and a list, and then returns a sublist of the elements of the original list that satisfy the predicate. For example, one might define a function `isOdd :: Integer -> Bool` and then filter as `filter isOdd listName`.

# Parsing with `deriving Read` and `reads`
* Unfortunately, parsing is more complicated than printing, since the string
  for an object may not parse correctly or may even be ambiguous.
* `reads` parses and returns a parsed object, along with the rest of the
  string.

# Useful tool: [Hoogle](http://www.haskell.org/hoogle)

A search engine for Haskell and the Haskell libraries. David Mazieres
recommends that you make this a keyword in your search bar! Haskell may have a
steep learning curve, but it is relatively easy to understand what code is
doing (with tools like this).

# Example: counting letters
```
import Data.Char    -- brings function isLower into scope

countLowerCase :: String -> Int -- String is just [Char]
countLowerCase str = length (filter isLower str)
```
Due to **thunks** you don't actually have to keep an intermediate list in
memory at any point in time, so this is reasonably efficient.

# Function composition

* The `.` infix operator provides function composition: `(f . g) x = f (g x)`.
* The new version doesn't name the argument, which is called **point-free**
  programming.
* This allows you to apply arguments kind of like right-to-left Unix piping.

# Lambda Extraction

* Sometimes you want to name arguments but not the function, which you can
  through **lambdas**.
* Use backslash ("`\\`") to declare a lambda. Here's an example:
```
countLowercaseAndDigits :: String -> Int
countLowercaseAndDigits =
    length . filter (\c -> isLower c || isDigit c)
```
# Infix vs Prefix notation

* Any type constructor can be written as a prefix or an infix.
    * If it starts with a lowercase letter, an underscore, or a digit, it's a prefix invocation; otherwise, it's infix by default.
	* A prefix-default function can be made infix by surroundeding it by backticks ("`\``").
    * Example: `add 1 2 == 1 \`add\` 2`.
	* An infix-default function can be made prefix with parentheses, e.g. `(+) 1 2`.
* If you don't add an argument, you're creating a function that is missing an
  argument (which can be applied to a new "first argument"
